+++
title = "०३"

+++

(1.) The thousand eyes of (Indra) simultaneously alighted on him, leaving the gods; generally the regard of lords for their dependents changes according to the purpose they desire to be accomplished. 
(2.) He was allowed a place near his own throne by Vasava with the words "sit here;" and he, having acknowledged the courtesy of his master by (a reverential inclination of) his head began to speak to him in private thus- 
(3.) O you who discern the special qualifications of men, command what you desire to be done in the (three) worlds, I should like this your favour shown by your remembrance (of me) to be enhanced by (the execution of) a command. 
(4.) By whom, desirous of getting your post, has your vengeance been roused by mighty (lit. exceedingly prolonged) austerities? For in a trice shall he be within the range of this my bow on which an arrow has been fixed. 
(5.) Who, undesired by you, is seeking the path of salvation through fear of rebirth? Let him long stand fettered down to wordly existence by the side-long glances, bewitching with the play of the eyebrows, of beautiful women. 
(6.) Say, of what foe of yours shall I, employing as my messenger sensuality, obstruct the temporal and spiritual advancement, although he be instructed in morality by Ushanas himself, as the flooded current of a river obstructs its two banks? 
(7.) What lady (having full buttocks) painfully keeping the vow of chastity, who has made a niche in your unsteady (lustful) mind by her beauty, do you wish to be compelled to twine her arms round your neck, of her own accord, abandoning all (sense of) shame ? 
(8.) O gallant, by what lady naturally passionate, have you been spurned for your infidelity in love although fallen at her feet? Her body shall I subject to strong repentance and make it (helplessly) resort to a couch of tender sprouts. 
( 15 ) 
(9.) O mighty one, be pleased; let your bolt rest; what foe of yours should quall, with the might of his arms rendered unavailing even before women, with lips curling through passion? 
(10.) Although flower-armed, taking Madhu (the presiding deity of the vernal season) alone for my associate, shall I break down (through your favour) the self-restraint even of the Trident-holder (S'iva). What are other bowmen before me then? 
11, Then Akhandala (Indra) having taken his leg off his thigh and honoured the footstool by placing it upon it, thus spoke to Kàma who had declared his power as equal to the ( achievement of the ) object he had in view- 
(12.) 
Friend, all is possible for you to do; I have but the two weapons, yourself and my bolt; my bolt (however) is powerless against those mighty with the power of austerities, while you go (unchallenged) everywhere and accomplish every thing. 
(13.) I know your strength, and hence employ you in acts of grave import as I would do myself; Krishna has assigned to S'esha the duty of bearing his body, on observing his capability to uphold the world. 
(14.) In talking of the power of your arrow to hit the Bull-emblemed God (S'iva), you have almost undertaken our work: know that at present this is just the desired object of the gods (lit. those who have an allotted portion in a sacrifice) who have powerful foes. 
(15.) The divine beings desire to have a leader for their host, sprung from the energy of Bhava, that they can conquer their foes. And he, the repository (or source) of the principal and accessary mantras, who has concentrated his mind on Brahma, can be subdued ( managed) by the fall of 
your one arrow. 
(16.) Strive to make him, who is self-restrained, love the devoted daughter of Himàlaya; of all women she alone is the proper ground for the depositing of his seed-so has declared the Self-born ( Brahmá ). 
(17.) And the daughter of the Mountain-lord, at her father's bidding, waits upon the Eternal one (S'iva ) 
( 10 ) 
practising penance ou the high region of Himàlaya-so have I heard from the lips of the heavenly nymphs; (for) they form my band of spies. 
(18.) So then go to accomplish this business; do the work of the gods. This purpose can only be attained by the achievment of another object: it, (therefore ), has need of you as its primary cause as the sprouting up of a seed requires water before it can make its appearance. 
(19.) On him, the means of the attainment of victory by the gods, your missile only, we grant, has power; you are blessed; (the performance of ) a deed, not accomplished by any other person, although unknown to fame, is the glory of men. 
20, These gods are your suppliants; the business (you have to accomplish) is ( for the benefit) of the three worlds; and the deed done by your bow is not very cruel : O wonder! Your prowess is to be envied !! 
(21.) O disturber of the peace of mind, Spring (Madhu) is your helper, though unasked, through your comradeship. Who asks the wind to be the fanner of fire ( lt. the devourer of the sacrificial offerings)? 
(22.) With the words "so be it", the God of love received on his head his master's command, like a garland offered as a gift of favour, and started ; and Indra touched his body (as a mark of special grace) with his hand grown rough by stroking the Airàvata (for encouragement). 
(23.) He went to the Himalayan resort of Sthânu (S′iva) followed by Màdhava, his dear friend, and by Rati with apprehension, determined to effect the work even at the cost of his body. 
(24.) In that forest Madhu ( the vernal season) manifested himself having assumed his proper form, which was an object of pride to the mind-born One (Kâma), acting antagonistically to the performance of austerities of the sages practising self-restraint. 
(25.) When the hot-rayed one (sun) began to go towards the quarter guarded by Kubera (the North) out of the proper season, the Southern quarter sent forth wind from her mouth like a sigh of anguish, 
(:17 ) 
(Side-meaning.) A certain 
kind-hearted damsel 
heaved out a sigh of pain from her mouth, when her lover, an adventurous gallant, started to go to another woman, kept by some deformed person, having broken the engagement with her. 
(26.) Then the As'oka tree put forth at once flowers together with foliage just from its stem and did not wait for a touch from the feet of the fair jingling with anklets. 
(27.) The Vernal Season having fitted up the arrow (of Káma) in the shape of the young mango blossom with fresh leaves as its feathers, inscribed on it, as it were, the name of the Mind-born in the shape of the bees. 
(28.) The Karnikára flower, though of gorgeous tints, pains the mind by its odourlessness; generally the mind of the Creator of the world is averse to bestowing completeness of qualities on a thing. 
(29.) The Palas'a buds, extremely red and curved like the young moon, not being blossomed, shone like red marks of nails on (the persons of) the Forest-sites then united with the Vernal Season (their lover). 
(30.) The Vernal Beauty having displayed on her fore head a Tilaka (the tilaka flower) artistically painted with black pigment in the shape of the bees that swarmed over it, ornamented her lip of the young mango leaf with a red tint (red lac) mellow like the light of the morning sun. 
(31.) The fawns with their eyes blinded by the pollendust of the blossom of the Piyàla trees and intoxicated with passion, ran wildly against the wind in the forest glades, full of the murmur of falling leaves. 
(32.) What strain of music was warbled out by the male Cuckoo, whose neck was red (or, whose voice was impassioned) by his feasting on the mango sprouts, became the mandate of Smara competent to break down the pride of high-minded dames. 
(33.) Perspiration made its appearance on the ornamental paintings (on the persons) of the Kinnara ladies, the complexion of whose faces was slightly yellow and whose 
( 18 ) 
lips looked bright (not being smeared with wax or, after Malli.-were free from pain), owing to the passing away of the wintry season. 
(34.) The ascetics, living in the forest of S'iva (lit. the immovable one), seeing the untimely manifestation of spring could, with difficulty, be masters of their minds whose perturbation was curbed with (great) effort. 
(35.) When Madana reached that region, with Rati as his companion, and his flower-bow strung, all living things forming themselves into pairs manifested by their actions amorous feeling pervaded by the sentiment of love gone to 
excess. 
(36.) The male bee, attentive to (according to Malli., following) his dear mate, drank honey from the same flower-bowl; and the black antelope scratched with his horn his female who had closed her eyes through the pleasant sensation caused by that touch. 
(37.) The female elephant, through great love, gave to the male the water held in her mouth, fragrant with the pollen-dust of lotuses. The Chakrawâka (lit. having the name of the member of a chariot) flattered his hen by giving her a lotus-stalk half eaten (by himself). 
(38.) The Kimpurusha, in the intervals of music, kissed his beloved's face with the eyes attractive by rolling through intoxication caused by the floral wine, and having its paintings a little disfigured (lit. loosened) by the drops of perspi - ration brought on by exertion. 
(39.) The trees even received close clasps from the arms, in the shape of tender twigs, of the creeper-wives, captivating with throbbing lips in the shape of young reddish sprouts and with breasts of the full clusters of flowers. 
(40.) Hara, though hearing the music of the heavenly damsels at such a time, remained absorbed in meditation; for never can "obstacles break the Samàdhi ( disturb the contemplation) of those who have complete control over themselves.( 19 ) 
(41.) Then Nandi, standing at the entrance of the creeper-bower, with a gold staff resting against his left forearm, checked the Ganas, ordering them not to be mischievous by a sign of his forefinger placed on the mouth. 
(42.) And at his bidding the whole forest itself stood with its movements committed to a painting as it were, the trees having ceased waving about, the swarms of bees having remained still, the birds having withheld their music, and the beasts having stopped roaming. 
(43.) Having avoided his glance, as one does the quarter wherein shines Venus, when starting on a journey, Kâma entered S'iva's abode of contemplation, screened with the thickly interwoven branches of the Nameru trees all round. 
(44.) He, the fall (destruction) of whose body was at hand, saw the Three-eyed God, absorbed in ascetic contemplation, seated on an altar of the Devadáru tree, covered over with a tiger's skin. 
(45.) The fore-part of whose body was steady owing to the posture called Virâsana, who was sitting straight and fully drawn, both of whose shoulders were a little bent, and in whose lap there lay as it 
as it were a full blown lotus, owing to his two hands being placed there with the palms turned upwards. 
(46.) The mass of whose matted hair was gathered upwards and tied with a serpent, who had a double string of Rudrakshas hanging down from his ears, and who wore a black antelope's hide with knots, appearing still more darkish on account of the complexion of his neck; 
(47.) Who was looking steadfastly at (the tip of) his nose with his eyes, the fierce pupils of which were motionless and shining out a little, and which had desisted from the habit of kniting the brows, the thick lashes of which were not moving and the vision of which was turned downwards; 
(48.) Who, on account of the suspension of the vital airs (lit. the airs moving inside), appeared like a cloud not 
(20) 
blustering up to burst into a shower, or like a reservoir of water unruffled with ripples or like a lamp (burning) steady In a place free from wind; 
(49.) Who was putting into shade the grace softer than that of the lotus fibres, of the young moon, by the rays of light shooting forth from the head, having got a passage through the eye in the cranium; 
(50.) Who, having fixed in his heart the mind, with its operations through the nine gates (of sense) entirely suspended and completely under the influence of concentration, was realising in himself his own self, whom the seers call the Eternal. 
(51.) Smara (Cupid), while looking at him, the threeeyed one, not to be assailed even in thought, in that posture, his hand drooping through fear, did not notice the bow and arrow dropped down from his hand. 
(52.) Just then was seen the daughter of the Lord of immovables (Himalaya) accompanied by the sylvan deities, reviving, as it were, his prowess, almost deadened, by the beauty of her person; 
(53.) Who wore a decoration of the spring flowers, the Asoka flowers in which put into shade the rubies, the Karnika ras bore the lustre of gold and the Sindhuvaras shone like a necklace of pearls; 
(54.) Who stooped a little with (the weight) of her breasts, and wore a garment of the hue of the morning sun› thus-looking like a walking creeper covered with folige and bending under the breast-like clusters of flowers; 
(55.) Who was drawing up with her hand again and again the zone, composed of Bakula flowers, slipping down her hips, which was, as it were, a second string for his bow deposited there by Smara who knew the appropriate place for it; 
(56.) And who, her eyes agitated through confusion, was keeping off, every moment, with a sportive lotus, a bee hovering round her Bimba-like nether lip, with its thirst (desire) excited by her fragrant breath. 
(57.) On seeing her, faultless in all her limbs, and a standing shame even to Rati, the flower-arrowed god again 
(21) 
hoped for the accomplishment of his object respecting the Trident-holder who had conquered his senses. 
(58.) Uma' approached the entrance (of the abode ) of S'ambhu, her future lord; and at the same time, he too, having realised in himself the eternal light called Parma'tman desisted from contemplation (broke the Sama'dhi). 
(59.) Then the Lord, slowly releasing all the vital airs in the body, the portion of the earth under him being, with great difficulty, upborne with the tops of his hoods by the lord of serpents, loosened the firm Vira'sana. 
(60.) 
To him, Nandi, having saluted, announced the coming of the daughter of the Mountain-lord through the desire of waiting upon him, and ushered her into the presence of his lord, her admittance being permitted with a mere sign of the eye-brow. 
(61.) By her two friends was scattered a collection of spring-flowers, mixed with bits of leaves gathered with their own hands, at the feet of the Three-eyed God, with a bow. 
(62.) 
Umà made a bow to the Bull-emblemed God with her head, when the tender leaf on the ear dropped down and the fresh Karinka'ra flowers shining in the midst of her black tresses got loosened. 
(63.) 
C 
She was indeed told the truth by Bhava when he said do yoge t a husband, who will not attend to another woman: the words of the mighty do not foster a sense contrary to their meaning in this world. 
"} 
(64.) Kama, having seized this as the proper opportunity for (discharging) his arrow, being as if desirous of entering the fire like a moth, touched again and again the string of his bow, having fixed his eye on Hara, while Uma stood hard by (lit. in the presence of Uma'). 
釁 
(65.) Then Gauri offered to Girisha, given to asceticism, a rosary of the seeds of lotuses grown in the Manda'kini and dried up by the rays of the sun, with a hand of a rosy colour. 
(22) 
(66.) The three-eyed God through love for devotees made ready to take that rosary, and the very moment the flower-arrowed God placed on the bow his unfailing arrow called Sammohana (the captivator). 
(67.) Hara, his firmness a little shaken, as is the sea (agitated) at the rising of the moon, cast his eyes on Uma's face, the lower lip of which was like the Bimba fruit. 
(68.) The daughter of the Mountain too, betraying her emotion by limbs that looked like the blooming Kadamba flowers (on account of the hair standing on end), stood with a half averted face, lovelier still and with the eyes agitated through shyness. 
(69.) Then S'iva, having strongly restrained the perturbation of his senses by means of his (perfect) self-control, and desiring to find out the cause of the disturbance of his heart, directed his eye towards the directions. 
(70.) 
Then he saw the mind-born one, his clenched fist resting on the corner of his left eye, his shoulders bent (forward) and his left foot drawn in, ready to strike with his beautiful bow stretched to (the figure of) a circle. 
(71.) All at once a blazing fire with rising flames sprang from the third eye of him, whose ire was roused by the disturbance to his austerities, and whose face was terrible to look at owing to the knitting of the eye-brows 
(72.) Ere the cries of the gods-"Restrain thy ire, restrain thy ire, O Lord"-could rise in the sky, the fire, born of the eye of Bhava, left only the ashes of Madana. 
(73.) And Rati, who for a time stood unconscious of the death of her husband, had a favour conferred upon her as it were by the swoon, which, occasioned by the sharp discomfiture, stifled all operations of her senses. 
(74.) Having quickly destroyed him, the obstacle to his austerities, as the bolt of Indra does a tree, the Great ascetic, the Lord of beings, together with his followers, vanished from sight, in order to avoid the vicinity of women. 
(28) 
(75.) The daughter of the Mountain knowing the desire of her exalted father as well as her lovely body to be vain, overwhelmed with shame all the more, because it happened in the presence of her two friends, somehow or other went homeward, like one dazed. 
(76.) Just then the Mountain, having taken into his arms his daughter who deserved to be sympathised with and who had closed her eyes in fear of the anger of Bhava, went along the path, as does the elephant of the gods holding a lotus sticking to his tusk, with his body stretched to its full length on account of his great speed. 