+++
title = "The successors of the kaunteya-s in the national memory of bhArata-s and bhoTa-s and related discursions"
date = "2013-12-26"
upstream_url = "https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/12/26/the-successors-of-the-kaunteya-s-in-the-national-memory-of-bharata-s-and-bhota-s-and-related-discursions/"

+++
Source: [here](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2013/12/26/the-successors-of-the-kaunteya-s-in-the-national-memory-of-bharata-s-and-bhota-s-and-related-discursions/).

[![](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/-poL9YmtTfgs/Uru9g_7rdSI/AAAAAAAACzY/6JeMO_NO2VY/s640/pandavas.jpg)](https://picasaweb.google.com/lh/photo/9CJ5Vhx1oEWbxbYLqklAlNMTjNZETYmyPJy0liipFm0?feat=embedwebsite)

## Epic
As per the mahAbharata, the great war on the kuru field came to a
conclusion with the smashing of duryodhana’s thighs by bhIma. While
balarAma wanted to kill bhIma for unfairly defeating the kuru prince in
the gadAyuddha, kR^iShNa convinced him to refrain from doing so.
Thereafter, he led the surviving pANDu-s and his relative sAtyaki to
rest in the enemy camp. But the remaining survivors on the pANDu side
slept in their own camp. Late that night, ashvatthAman, having been
inspired by an owl hunting sleeping crows, attacked the pANDava camp
aided by his uncle kR^ipa and yadu hero kR^itavarman. There he killed
the sleeping pA\~nchAla princes shikhaNDin, dR^iShTadyumna, yudhAmanyu
and uttamaujas by kicking them or strangling them with bowstrings. Then
he killed and beheaded the 5 sons of draupadI: prativindhya, sutasoma,
shrutakIrti, shatAnIka and shrutakarman. With that the line of the
illustrious pa\~nchAla-s, which was praised in the veda, came to an end.
The pANDu-s were left with draupadI, who represented the “shrI” of the
erstwhile pa\~nchAla realm. 

## Kuru, panchAla, yadu, sAlva, nAga
While much of this is in the realm of
history filled into the variegated bottles of Indo-European mythic and
epic motifs we can still discern some kind of actual historical events
behind these narratives. As we have tentatively argued before there
appears to have been an older layer involving a civil war within the
kuru-pa\~nchAla confederation in core AryAvarta. In this confrontation,
the kuru-s might have destroyed the pa\~nchAla-s, perhaps via the action
of the feral bharadvAja brAhmaNa ashvatthAman. 

The larger canvas of
these events appears to have included conflicts with another Indo-Aryan
state of the salva-s who were initially defeated by the kuru-s and
subsequently destroyed by the yadu-s under kR^iShNa devakIputra and his
allies. 

Another group, the nAga-s, called by some as non-Aryan, were in
reality most certainly culturally Arya. This group was also contending
for power in this period against the yadu-s led by kR^iShNa. [The
pANDu-s coming from the Iranian border zone appear to have subsequently
emerged as key
players](https://manasataramgini.wordpress.com/2006/05/04/the-mystery-of-the-pandava-s/ "The mystery of thepANDava-s").
Initially they allied with the yadu-s to gain territory from the nAga-s.
This sparked off a long standing feud between the latter and the pANDu-s
with some nAga groups allying themselves to the pANDu-s and other
fiercely opposing them. Subsequently, the pANDu alliance destroyed the
surviving kuru power in alliance with the remnants of the pa\~nchAla-s
and the yadu-s. Finally they placed themselves as rulers after
completing the destruction of the nAga power. Their joint queen draupadI
appear to symbolically represent the shrI or the wealth and power of the
old pa\~nchAla monarchs, which was now in the hands of the pANDu-s
though the former had no successors.

## As the second wave
In historical terms these pANDu-s might be seen as epic representations
of a secondary wave of Aryans invading from the northwest towards the
end of the kuru-pa\~nchAla or Vedic period. They in alliance with local
pre-existing Indo-Aryan groups appear to have established new successor
states with the fragmentation of the kuru-pa\~nchAla-s in northern
India. This secondary wave along with others might be associated with
the transformation of Vedic India into the early “classical” India
wherein new religious systems, concepts and deities were superimposed
upon the earlier shrauta system formalized in the kuru-pa\~nchAla realm.
It is conceivable that archaeologically they correspond to the famous
Painted Grey Ware culture of northern India. Despite their huge cultural
effect, their own direct political contribution was limited. There are
few India dynasties that consistently claim origin from the pANDu-s. The
Greek authors noted that there was a lineage of pANDu-s ruling in the
pa\~nchanada region in the last centuries of the common era. Indeed,
Indic sources mention the yaudheya and arjunAyana republics in the same
region which are believed to be founded by successors of the kaunteya-s
descending respectively from secondary wives of yudhiShThira and arjuna
respectively. These republics played a major role in the nativist
movement leading to the defeat of the eastern Iranian Kushanas. The
pANDya in south India might also represent such dynastic, if not
biological, successor state of the old pANDu-s. But evidence for their
true successors is otherwise sparse. Rather, the fragmentation of the
unified bhArata realm caused by the actions of the pANDu-s probably
resulted in several local Indo-Aryan republics and kingdoms holding sway
till the times of udayana and later the revival of magadhan imperialism
\[consistent with the concluding statements of the bhArata where several
city states are established in the aftermath of the pANDu reign\].

-۩۞۩-۩۞۩-۩۞۩-
....